Performance investigation 0008 gthread grpc (#60)
ONSdigital/eq-survey-runner-benchmark: doc/performance-investigations/0008-use-gthread-grpc/summary.md

> # Title

Author: well it is a title 😆

> Gevent is currently in experimental status within the Google client libraries; the impact of switching to gthread as a gunicorn worker type has been investigated, as this is formally supported. Additionally, the gRPC protocal as an alternative to http has been investigated. This cannot currently be used with the gevent worker type.

Reviewer: I think this needs to be made clearer. Gevent is in experimental status in the Google gRPC client libraries. We have not had an issue with this until now as we have been using Datastore over HTTP (via requests). We uncovered the issue as the pubsub library doesn't have a HTTP option and must be used over gRPC.

> Branch used: https://github.com/ONSdigital/eq-questionnaire-runner/tree/performance-investigation-gthread-grpc

Reviewer 2: Is it worth mentioning in the doc the no. of threads used?

## Benchmark profile

| Option                 | Value                        |
| ---------------------- | ---------------------------- |
| Requests file          | census_household_gb_eng.json |
| Run time               | 20m                          |
| User wait time minimum | 1                            |
| User wait time maximum | 2                            |
| Clients                | 64                           |
| Hatch rate             | 64                           |

## Results

Results based on average timings.

> | Metric              | baseline | gthread & grpc | gthread |

Reviewer 2: Can you swap these columns around? `gthread & grpc | gthread`

| ------------------- | -------- | -------------- | ------- |
| Questionnaire GETs  | 111ms    | 87ms           | 133ms   |
| Questionnaire POSTs | 109ms    | 132ms          | 128ms   |
| All requests        | 110ms    | 116ms          | 131ms   |

## Discussion

> The results show very little difference between the `gevent` and `gthread` worker types in terms of performance. Errors remained at 0 for both. Switching to `gRPC` was also succesful, in so much that it worked, did not introduce errors and resulted in slightly better response times, especially for GET requests.

Reviewer: I disagree withe first sentence, a ~20% increase in response times is a difference worth mentioning. I also think we should highlight the performance difference for POST requests as a concern.

## Decision

1. The eq-questionnaire-runner web server, worker type, and worker threads variables should be made configurable via Concourse pipeline deployment and Helm charts.

> 1. Further testing of `gthread` and `grpc` should be undertaken, though under a substantially increased load.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Further testing of `gthread` and `grpc` should be undertaken, under a substantially increased load.
```

> 1. The use of Datastore instead of Redis should be investigated, especially since the use og gRPC is possible using the `gthread` worker type.

Reviewer: I think this point should be removed. The reasons for trying to use Datastore instead of Redis are wider than this investigation, and without those reasons I don't think we would suggest it.

Reviewer 3: I think the scale test we're currently running will consolidate this performance investigation. This will probably cover this point.

# Use gthread gunicorn worker and grpc protocol

This investigation examines the feasibility of switching the gunicorn worker type from gevent to gthread, and the use of the gRPC protocol over HTTP when calling Datastore. There are a number of reasons for this investigation:

1. gevent is currently in experimental status within the Google client libraries.
1. gthread is fully supported by the Google cloud client libraries.

> 1. gRPC is not interoperable with the gevent worker type.

Reviewer: It is, it just requires the experimental code mentioned in point 1.

Branch used: https://github.com/ONSdigital/eq-questionnaire-runner/tree/performance-investigation-gthread-grpc

## Benchmark profile

| Option                 | Value                        |
| ---------------------- | ---------------------------- |
| Requests file          | census_household_gb_eng.json |
| Run time               | 20m                          |
| User wait time minimum | 1                            |
| User wait time maximum | 2                            |
| Clients                | 64                           |
| Hatch rate             | 64                           |
| Worker Threads         | 10                           |

## Results

Results based on average timings.

| Metric              | baseline | gthread | gthread & gRPC |
| ------------------- | -------- | ------- | -------------- |
| Questionnaire GETs  | 111ms    | 133ms   | 87ms           |
| Questionnaire POSTs | 109ms    | 128ms   | 132ms          |
| All requests        | 110ms    | 131ms   | 116ms          |

## Discussion

> Response times under gthread (without gRPC) increased for both GET and POST requests however, With gthread & gRPC results show a 24% decrease in GET request response times. Although promising it was offset by a rise in POST request response times of 26%. Errors remained at 0 for both the gthread and the gthread & gRPC scenarios.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The benchmark performance under gthread and gRPC are good enough to warrant further investigation. Response times increased under gthread (without gRPC) for both GET and POST requests by 20% over the baseline. Enabling gRPC however improved GET request response times by 24%, offset by an increase in POST request response times of 26%. As most requests in runner are a combination of a POST and then a GET, this should make little difference in real-world usage. Errors remained at 0 for both the gthread and the gthread & gRPC scenarios.
```

## Decision

1. The eq-questionnaire-runner web server, worker type, and worker threads variables should be made configurable via Concourse pipeline deployment and Helm charts.

> 1. Further testing of gthread and gRPC should be undertaken, though under a substantially increased load.

Reviewer: This should be the first point, as the main outcome of the investigation.
